
    UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres appeals for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire in Ukraine.
    Ukrainian forces have retaken Irpin, a few miles from Kyiv, the local mayor says.
    Russia’s Novaya Gazeta newspaper suspends activities amid Moscow’s intensifying crackdown on critical reporting of the war.
    Moscow has dismissed the possibility of talks between Russian President Vladimir Putin and his Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskyy for the time being.


British intelligence says Russia’s Wagner Group deployed to eastern Ukraine

British military intelligence has said a Russian private military company, the Wagner Group, has been deployed to eastern Ukraine.

“They are expected to deploy more than 1,000 mercenaries, including senior leaders of the organisation, to undertake combat operations,” Britain’s Ministry of Defence said.

The European Union had imposed sanctions on the Russian private military contractor in December for helping finance mercenaries in Ukraine, Libya and Syria.
Rocket strikes oil depot in Ukraine’s northwestern Rivne region: Governor

The governor of Ukraine’s northwestern Rivne region has said Russian forces carried out a rocket strike on an oil depot.

In a short video address posted online, Governor Vitaliy Koval said emergency services were at the scene, but did not give further details.

Ukraine’s communications company accuses Russia of cyber attack

The State Special Communications Service of Ukraine (SSSCIP Ukraine) has accused Russian forces of launching a cyberattack against Ukrtelecom, Ukraine’s telephone company.

SSSCIP chairman Yurii Shchyhol said the cyberattack was neutralised and that efforts were under way to resume service, the company wrote on Twitter.

In a separate post, it added Ukrtelecom had suspended services to the majority of its private users and business clients to continue providing service to the army.

Ukraine says 1,099 people evacuated from cities

A total of 1,099 people have been evacuated from Ukrainian cities through humanitarian corridors on Monday, a senior official has said.

Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of the president’s office, said in an online post that 586 people had left the besieged city of Mariupol by car and 513 were evacuated by bus in the Luhansk region.

Zelenskyy hints at openness to compromise on eastern Ukraine

Ukraine is prepared to consider a compromise on contested areas in the country’s east, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said, ahead of another round of talks set for Tuesday.

“I realise that it’s impossible to force Russia to fully leave the territory. It could lead to World War III. I understand completely. I’m fully aware of it,” he said. “That is why I’m saying, yes, this is a compromise: Go back to where it all started and then we’ll try to resolve the issue of Donbas, the complex issue of Donbas.”

Zelenskyy added the only way to end the war was a face-to-face meeting with Russia’s leader, a possibility Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov dismissed earlier.

Ukraine aims at ceasefire with Russia at Turkey talks: Foreign Minister

Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba has said Kyiv’s most ambitious goal at the upcoming talks with Russia in Turkey is to agree on a ceasefire.

“The minimum programme will be humanitarian questions, and the maximum programme is reaching an agreement on a ceasefire,” he said on national television, when asked about the scope of the latest round of peace negotiations that are expected to kick off on Tuesday.

Russia to study video of alleged mistreatment of prisoners

The Kremlin has said Russian investigators will look into a video circulated on social media that purported to show Ukrainian forces mistreating captured Russian soldiers.

The footage shared on Sunday shows five of the prisoners tied up and lying on the ground being beaten by soldiers who are likely Ukrainian. Three other captives are shot in their legs without provocation.

Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said the video contained “monstrous images” and needed to be legally assessed, and that those who took part in what he described as torture needed to be held responsible.

Ukraine’s Prosecutor General Iryna Venediktova said the video could not be taken at face value. Military spokesperson Oleksander Motuzyanyk said the veracity of the footage could not be verified.

Biden says ‘I make no apologies’ for Putin remarks

United States President Joe Biden has said he is “not walking anything back” after his weekend comment that Russian President Vladimir Putin “cannot remain in power”.

He dismissed claims that he was calling for regime change in Moscow. “I wasn’t articulating a policy change,” he said. “I was expressing the moral outrage that I felt toward this man.”

The remark about Putin, which came at the end of a speech in Warsaw, stirred controversy in the United States and among some allies in Western Europe.

“This is just stating a simple fact, that this kind of behaviour is totally unacceptable,” Biden said.

Ukrainian negotiators urge caution on poisoning reports

Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak has poured cold water on reports of the alleged poisoning of Ukrainian negotiators and Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich.

“There is a lot of speculation, various conspiracy theories,” Podolyak said.

Rustem Umerov, another member of the negotiating team, urged people not to trust “unverified information”.

Workers say Russian soldiers disturbed radioactive dust in Chernobyl

Russian soldiers who seized the site of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster have driven their armoured vehicles without radiation protection through a highly toxic zone called the “Red Forest”, kicking up clouds of radioactive dust, workers at the site said.

Two sources told Reuters soldiers in the convoy did not use any anti-radiation gear. One employee said that was “suicidal” for the soldiers because the radioactive dust they inhaled was likely to cause internal radiation in their bodies.

The Red Forest is the most radioactively contaminated part of the zone around Chernobyl, about 100 kilometres north of Kyiv.


Ukraine says it has ‘proof’ of use of banned weapons

Prosecutor General Iryna Venediktova has said Ukraine has proof Russian forces used banned cluster bombs in two southern regions of the country.

“We have proof of the [use] of cluster bombes in the Odesa region and in the Kherson area,” Venediktova told journalists. “I can only mention instances where I have very concrete proof, for example … when I have (bomb) fragments or soil samples and analyses.”

Cluster bombs spread dozens of tiny explosive charges across an area, some of which may not immediately explode and in effect become anti-personnel mines that pose a threat to civilians long after a conflict ends.

Pressure groups like Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have also said they collected proof of the use of cluster bombs in areas where civilians were present.

Turkey’s Erdogan to meet Ukraine, Russia delegates

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has said he would meet “briefly” with the Ukrainian and Russian delegations ahead of two days of face-to-face talks scheduled to kick off on Tuesday.

In a televised address, the Turkish leader also said that separate telephone calls held with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Russian President Vladimir Putin were progressing in a “positive direction”.

US intelligence suggests ‘environmental’ factor sickened Abramovich: Reuters

A US official who spoke to Reuters on condition of anonymity has said that intelligence suggests the sickening of Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich and Ukrainian peace negotiators was due to an environmental factor, not poisoning.

“The intelligence highly suggests this was environmental,” the source said, adding: “not poisoning”. They declined to elaborate further.

The account contradicts an earlier report by the Wall Street Journal and investigative outlet Bellingcat saying Abramovich and the negotiators had suffered symptoms of suspected poisoning after a meeting in Kyiv.

UK to strengthen economic pressure on Russia

Britain will increase economic pressure on Russia, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has told Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in a call ahead of a new round of talks in Istanbul.

“President Zelenskyy provided an update on negotiations and the two leaders agreed to coordinate closely in the days ahead,” Johnson’s office said in a readout of the call.

“The Prime Minister reiterated the UK would maintain and strengthen economic pressure on Putin’s regime.”

EU countries look to share effort of hosting Ukrainian refugees

Germany has called for a more even distribution of Ukrainian refugees in the European Union, after some 3.8 million people fled war on their country and crossed into the 27-nation bloc.

“We need to more actively distribute refugees within the EU and show solidarity by taking in refugees,” German Interior Minister Nancy Faeser told reporters in Brussels, where interior ministers of all EU countries met to discuss the situation.

The country, the biggest in the bloc with more than 80 million people, says it has registered more than 270,000 Ukrainian refugees, compared with some 30,000 who have entered France, the second-biggest member.

The ministers discussed sharing information and synchronising databases, as well as transporting refugees further west in the EU.

Ukrainian negotiators, Russian oligarch suffered suspected poisoning: WSJ

Ukrainian peace negotiators and Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich suffered symptoms of suspected poisoning after a meeting in Kyiv earlier this month, the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) has reported, citing people familiar with the matter.

Symptoms included red eyes, constant and painful tearing, and peeling skin on their faces and hands, the sources said, adding that they blamed the suspected attack on hard-liners in Moscow who want to sabotage talks to end the war in Ukraine.

Abramovich and the Ukrainian negotiators, who include Crimean Tatar lawmaker Rustem Umerov, have since improved and their lives aren’t in danger, WSJ reported.

The Russian oligarch became involved in attempts to end the war despite longstanding links to President Vladimir Putin. The Kremlin didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment from the American newspaper.

UN chief appeals for humanitarian ceasefire

Guterres says he has directed the world body’s aid chief, Martin Griffiths, “to explore with the parties involved” the possibility of a humanitarian ceasefire in Ukraine.

“Since the beginning of the Russian invasion one month ago, the war has led to the senseless loss of thousands of lives, the displacement of 10 million people, mainly women and children, the systematic destruction of essential infrastructure and skyrocketing food and energy prices worldwide – this must stop,” he said at the UN’s headquarters in New York.

“But let’s be clear, the solution to this humanitarian tragedy is not humanitarian, it is political,” Guterres added.

“I am therefore appealing for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire to allow for progress in serious political negotiations aimed at reaching a peace agreement based on the principles of the United Nations charter.”

Guterres said a cessation of hostilities would also allow for “essential humanitarian aid to be delivered and enable civilians to move around safely”.

“It will save lives, prevent suffering and protect civilians,” he added.




